so last week Wednesday the 10th of April
2019 was a big day the event horizon
telescope that's been taking data for a
couple years now finally released their
long-awaited image of a black hole and
so the dust has had a little bit of time
to settle after a bit of a manic week
and so I thought it would be a really
great time now to reflect on the reasons
why we actually care about this why it's
not just a pretty picture
so first up this is the very first image
of the sphere of influence of a black
hole the event horizon that we've ever
been able to achieve it sort of confirms
our theories of what was actually in the
center of galaxies powering the extreme
radiation we saw coming from the center
so back in the 60s for those who
remember my story of supermassive black
holes video I'll link it up in a card
and down below in the comments you
remember that people were seeing x-ray
emission and radio emission from the
Centers of galaxies and they couldn't
explain what that was coming from
because black holes were still
theoretical objects but then when Sir
Stephen Hawking came along and said well
actually black holes are sort of a
natural byproduct of the mathematics
that you have in general activity and
then also Jocelyn Bell Burnell and had
seemed discovered neutron stars were
real and therefore neutron stars are
sort of the one step up from something
becoming a black hole then people
started to think well maybe you can get
this super high radiation coming from
the Centers of galaxies if you have
accretion onto a stupid dense object in
the center you might be wondering well
how on earth can they take an image of a
black hole because by definition a black
hole is something that is so dense and
so massive in such a small space that
it's escape velocity is greater than the
speed of light so you don't get you know
any light from this black horse you
can't see it but what they've done here
is actually take an image of the
material directly around the black hole
so we're talking about the scale of this
image is only a couple of solar system
sizes across that they've managed to
take and so they're taking the actual
material that's currently spiraling
around the black hole and what we call
an accretion disk so accretion is a word
that we use a lot in astrophysics it
basically means like collected under
gravity and so this disk is this metier
is eventually going to be accreted or
eaten by the black hole and so what
happens is that that material is moving
at such high high speeds like close to
the speed of light that it heats up due
to friction and it emits light that way
and then that's the light we can then
see and take an image of course the
black hole is also in the middle of that
disk of material as well so if it's
slightly inclined to you and also this
disc is sort of rotating as well as it
spirals in towards the black hole then
some of its coming towards you and some
of it is moving away from you but then
also the light that's coming from behind
this 3-dimensional you know mass of the
black hole there is gonna be absorbed as
well so you end up sort of with a bright
patch of this disc and then a darker
patch and then also the light in the
middle where you pass what we call the
event horizon so the event horizon is
the sort of point of no return around a
black hole that if you pass that point
then nothing is going to be able to get
back out of the black hole again because
that's the point in which you need a
speed higher than the speed of light in
order to escape the gravitational pull
of it so you end up casting what people
been calling a shadow of the black hole
there's been some debate about whether
it's a shadow or whether it's a
silhouette essentially you end up seeing
this circle in the middle of this
accretion disk where there is no light
coming towards you and so our
predictions for what we might expect to
see if there was a black hole there I've
actually turned out to be true as well
so the second reason why we care about
this image is because we can actually
use it to test our theories of gravity
so Newton came up with a theory of
gravity back so 500 years ago and he
said it was this sort of mysterious
force at a distance where objects feel a
force proportional to how massive they
are Einstein came along and said
actually let's think about gravity as
curving space so anything with mass sits
on space itself and curves it with
anything traveling on that curved space
their path gets bent so a light would
continue traveling on a straight line
unless it got bent by curved space and
the reason that Einstein came up with
this new way of thinking about it was
also because Newton's gravity although
Newton's equations of gravity explain
what we saw on earth
really quite well they didn't really
predict what we were seeing on larger
scales even in the solar system itself
so Mercury's orbit Newtonian gravity
couldn't explain Mercury's orbit and for
a while we thought it was to do with the
observations that we were making errors
but in fact it was just our equations
were missing a term they were missing
this term the higher speeds something
else is happening so Einstein's theories
of gravity actually adapted Newton's
equations to say there's this extra term
when you're at higher speeds or at
higher mastered something what we call
relativistic energies and so we've
tested that against the orbit of mercury
and Einstein's equations work we've
tested it in terms of the orbits of
stars in galaxies and Einstein's
equations work what we've never been
able to do is test Einstein's equations
in sines theory of gravity so close to a
black hole before where you have pushed
to the most extreme relativistic
energies the highest speeds and the
highest masses you can get to as well
and so with this image they were able to
say okay given that Einstein said that
black holes and objects in space will
curve space-time has it done that to the
light around it and that's why we end up
actually seeing this sort of brighter
side of the accretion disk yes one is
the fact that it's been absorbed by the
black hole behind it but also the light
has been bent around the black hole and
then aimed towards us because of the
gravitational effects of the presence of
the black hole as well and we've been
able to say yes the materials fine
around that black hole fully fits
Einstein's theories of gravity and it
was right again and there were some
people that were kind of disappointed
that there wasn't any new physics or new
ideas about gravity that came out of
that it was not only were disappointed
that Einstein was right but they were
always disappointed there was nothing
new to learn it was almost kind of a
surprise that our theories fit what we
saw again that yes we should take iron
Stein's theory of gravity at all masses
at all speeds anywhere in the universe
they should hold so the third thing that
we care about is that we can now test
how black holes grow so the material in
that accretion disk will eventually fall
into the black hole and basically add to
its mass and helping
in that and so what it can help us
understand is how black holes have grown
from the very early universe from say
ten times the mass of the Sun after some
stars gone supernova in the early
universe or maybe even 10,000 times the
mass of the Sun if you've had direct
collapse of some massive gas cloud check
out my other video on direct collapse
black holes if you want to know more
about that but how it's gone from that
in the early universe to what we see now
at something like a million to a billion
times the mass of the Sun you know how
has that growth happened in those 13
billion years has it been constant or
has it been variable has it been
stochastic in some way and so our best
understanding now of how black holes
grow is that we think they're quite
variable it's quite stochastic growth
where you have some inflow of material
of gas from the galaxy itself towards
the center the black hole accretes all
it can quite quickly and then you have
to wait for sort of the next inflow of
gas it's not a constant thing the black
hole quite quickly clears the area
around it all all you seen with m87 is
that the accretion seems to be quite
constant over about week or so
observations the accretion disk image
didn't change that much at all so at
least we know it's not variable on those
kind of a timescale but with further
observations in the future maybe we will
see more variability
the fourth reason why we care is the
reason I care the most and that's
because there's this small scale that
we're looking at here is so very
connected to the large scale now if
you've seen an image of m87 before you
will see that it's this sort of
yellowish blob of a galaxy but then
actually there's also this huge
energetic jet sort of this purplish
color bluish purplish color that's
coming all the way out of the galaxy for
hundreds of thousands of light years and
that jet is thought to be powered by the
black hole so it's not just general
relativity we're testing with this image
we're also testing some it's called
general relativistic magneto hydro
dynamics
which basically means how gravity and
the magnetic field around the black hole
are interacting so that all that plasma
the material that's in the accretion
disk basically incredibly incredibly hot
material it's been ionized so it's
electrons are separate from the protons
and neutrons in the atoms is interacting
with the magnetic field and so you've
got charged particles around this black
hole there's also spinning as well and
so as it spins the magnetic field lines
around that black hole get incredibly
incredibly tangled because it's spinning
so fast then you've got charged
particles that are then gonna follow
those magnetic field lines and
essentially what we think happens is
they get accelerated away from the
accretion disk into these huge Jets
again ejecting you know very close to
the speed of light and so managed to
come out of the galaxies in this huge
scale and so what impact we think these
Jets have is to impact on the material
between galaxies and so what that can do
is then heat all that material and
that's the material that's basically
gonna feed your galaxies fresh gas
supply then it can funnel to the black
hole or it can make stars with and so by
getting this data of the accretion disk
around a black hole we can also test our
general relativistic magneto
hydrodynamics simulations of what's
going on when all these magnetic field
lines get all into crossed over and
messed up and then all the particles get
accelerated outwards to check if that's
actually what's happening here as well
and get an understanding for how the
very very small scale around the black
hole has a much larger impact on the
galaxies and even the cluster of
galaxies that it lives in
the fifth and final reason why this
image is so momentous Asha physicist is
that it is a proof of concept the image
was taken by using radio telescopes that
were dotted across earth to make one
single radio telescope now the reason
for this is that the resolution or the
size of the thing that you can resolve
clearly is dependent on how big your
telescope is so we call our resolution
at a Greek letter theta and it's portal
to the wavelength of light that you're
looking in divided by the diameter of
the telescope that you have now building
a telescope with the diameter big enough
to resolve something that is about three
times the size of our solar system a
distance of 55 million light-years is
just not feasible at all what you find
when you do that calculation is that you
need a telescope there's as big as the
earth what astronomers quickly figured
out though was that you didn't need to
build a telescope that big instead if
you could take a telescope say and I'm
taught to go and combine it with a
telescope say in Hawaii and observe the
same object at the same time you an
effective main a telescope that has a
diameter of the distance separating
Antarctica and Hawaii the problem is
that you weren't sampling that entire
space you didn't have detectors fully
across that entire distance what you
could do is basically wait for the earth
to rotate and therefore you would sort
of fill in the gaps so you did have
detectors in those places and the more
telescopes you add the less gaps you
would have the thing is though even with
the Earth's rotation you don't end up
filling in all of the gaps and so what
they also had to do was develop a new
computer algorithm to basically infer
the data where there was gaps and what
should be expected given what data you
do have so the person who actually led
this was a graduate student MIT called
Katy boomin who's now an assistant
professor at Caltech which is awesome
and she came up with this new computer
algorithm that basically said given the
data that I have and given all the other
images that been taken in the world
whether they're selfies or Birds or they
are actually of astronomical images or
maybe there are simulations of what we
should be seeing what kind of image do
we reproduce if we use that as a
training set for what the image could
eventually look like and basically we're
able to show that no matter what
training set
whether it is the selfie so whether it
is normal astronomer images taken of
saint nebula or galaxies you end up
reconstructing images that look
incredibly similar and what you should
expect to see of this accretion disk she
gives an amazing TED talk on this I know
again I will link that down below for
you guys to go watch if you want to know
more information about this amazing
computer algorithm but because you've
had proof of concept this actually works
that you can resolve it using just eight
telescopes and having this computer
algorithm it means that people will be
more likely to jump on board with
studies like this it means that we'll
get more telescopes added to the array
so we won't be just doing it with eight
you'll be doing it and save twenty and
maybe even we'll be able to extend the
size of our telescope beyond the the
size of the earth maybe by putting a
radio telescope into space into orbit
around Earth or perhaps in a trailing
orbit sort of following the earth around
the Sun maybe even on the moon so then
the effective diameter of your telescope
is the distance between the Earth and
the moon which means that the object
that you can resolve would be even
tinier we could see these things in even
greater distance or even in more detail
as well which would be incredible we
could eventually reach a point where
releasing an image of a black hole is
just becomes the norm maybe even like a
data dump of a hundred at once will feel
completely normal just you know like a
regular Tuesday that's the dream
but one of the next steps for the event
horizon tells look now that it's done
this first image of the supermassive
black hole and m87 well admittedly I
think most astronomers last Wednesday
we're not expecting this image to be of
m87 they were expecting it to be of what
we call Sagittarius a star which is the
supermassive black hole at the center of
the Milky Way and what it wasn't people
were like huh okay all right we'll run
with it we'll go with em 87 and so
people have been speculating a little
bit on why maybe they released m87
before they released the Milky Way's
image of a black hole and one of those
reasons could be inclination so the fact
the accretion disk around the Milky
Way's black hole might be inclined so
that we don't actually see it from a
very optimum sort of direction and that
sort of affecting the image reduction
another reason just could because
there's just so much foreground so
basing there's so many stars and dust
and gas in the way of you seeing the
black hole in the Milky Way compared to
when you look out of the Milky Way's
disk up to m87
that it's sort of wondering you know
what is actually noise what's real data
what's foreground that you can get rid
of and subtract in those four grounds is
very very difficult as well and it could
also be due to the variability of the
Milky Way's accretion disk as well
perhaps it's not as constant accretion
as m87 and so they're not sure what sort
of signal they're getting it's not
consistent either also they want to add
a different wavelength to the array as
well so far all these have been images
have been taken and what's called the
submillimetre sort of between infrared
and radio regimes on the electromagnetic
spectrum about 1.3 millimeter in
wavelengths they're now going to drop to
0.87 millimetres in wavelength by adding
some new telescopes to the array as well
and so that's gonna improve their
resolution more because you've dropped
your wavelength so your resolution will
increase so I'm really excited to see
whether we get an image of the Milky
Way's black hole next or whether it's a
higher resolution of m87 or whether it's
a an image that shows us that it's been
variable in its accretion somehow and
just how much more physics we'll be able
to learn from observing black holes like
this in this whole new way not filming
on a Sunday it's given me an excuse not
to watch the Masters this year
super gas cloud check out my other video
on direct collapse black holes you might
be interested in that stupid phone how
dare you buzz at me while I am snapchat
God we really need a haircut
well serve my black coat till I can't no
more gonna take data till there's no
more lag and the fifth and final reason
why we really care about this image is
because my sister takes me I was like
yeah I've seen the image it's like a
funny orange blob yeah but it's an
orange blob with a hole in the middle
who know some of you wanted this video
last week where there was no way that I
could have gone from 2 o'clock
announcement to like edit and then
posting later in the day because I did
radio and I did tele as well I was on
the evening news talking about this
though so Wednesday's this video day and
if stuff like this falls on a Wednesday
again we just have to be patient wait
till next Wednesday